>> Will you be ready when it's
time for your son or daughter
with a disability to move
to a place of their own?
The time to start planning is now.
Hi, my name is Susan Shimota, and I'm
the housing project coordinator here
at PACER center.
PACER is a Minnesota nonprofit
organization and a national parent center
that provides information, training,
and assistance to parents of children
and young adults with all disabilities.
I have a 25-year-old son with autism spectrum
disorder and a mental health disability.
If you have a child with a
disability who is 14 or older,
it's important to start thinking
about housing now.
I'd like to talk to you for a few minutes about
two housing-related points you need to know.
First, why is it important to
start thinking about housing now?
And second, what is person-centered
thinking and planning?
First, why is it important to
start thinking about housing now?
Most parents expect their kids to
grow up and move out of the house.
For parents of children with disabilities,
the young adult's transition into a place
of their own usually takes
more thinking and planning.
We recognize that every child has
different abilities and needs for support
and that most parents have to
be involved in that process.
We also believe that starting early will lead
to better outcomes for your son or daughter.
This leads me to my second point; what
is person-centered thinking and planning?
One of the first steps in
person-centered thinking,
which starts before person-centered
planning, is to consider where your son
or daughter might want to live on their own.
For example, you might think your daughter
would like to have a roommate and live
within walking distance of a library and a park.
Notice that I didn't ask you what type of
housing you want your daughter to live in,
but rather what type of housing you
think she would want to live in.
This is person-centered thinking.
Then you might want to have a
casual conversation with your son
or daughter and ask the same question.
When you grow up, where do you think
you would like to live and work?
Talk to them about the places they like
to go, the activities they like to do,
and the people they like to be with.
These questions encourage
person-centered thinking.
I'd suggest that you revisit that subject with
your son or daughter on multiple occasions
and you could also have discussions
with relatives and friends
if they are not able to actively participate.
The important thing is now to shift your
thinking and put your son or daughter
in the driver's seat, so that they are
at the center of the planning process.
That's where the term person-centered
planning comes from.
Person-centered planning is a process that
is driven by the unique likes and dislikes
of the person and his or her family.
What are your son or daughter's
unique hopes and dreams?
What is important to him or her?
I had a parent tell me recently that her son was
determined to live downtown so it was convenient
for him to attend sporting events.
Although the parents were concerned
about safety and supports downtown,
they were exploring the possibilities for him.
I also spoke to a young adult
named Joe, who told me that he
and his friend Steve wanted
to rent an apartment together.
One of the most important things to
them was being near a coffee shop.
This might not be at the top of
your list or mind, but for Joe
and Steve this was important
and that is what really matters.
Not only is this person-centered
approach a more positive way to plan
for your young adult's future,
it is also supported by law.
So to recap, when thinking about
housing for your son or daughter,
first start the conversation now and second,
ask questions that encourage person-centered
thinking with your son or daughter.
It is an exciting time and we encourage you to
move forward with these important first steps.
I also encourage you to visit our website at
pacer.org/housing or call us at 952-838-9000.
You will find helpful information there,
wherever you are in the housing journey.